Hi, I'm vegan, my first diploma was in political
science; thinking, reading and writing about
politics has continued to be a big part of
my daily life.
I'm here to talk, briefly, about the question
of the political aspirations and goals of
veganism, what I encounter both in talking
to people face-to-face, and the larger number
of people who have talked to me online.
I'm going to hit three issues really quickly.
The first is that many of the people I've
spoken to, who have been vegan for some time,
have a sense of disappointment and frustration
because they begin with the idea that veganism
is a community, that veganism is a social
movement, and then they struggle with disappointment
in what that community and movement have and
haven't done, what standards they do and don't
live up to.
I think it's much more, shall we say, liberating,
more honest and more useful to really face
up to the fact that in the western world,
in the English-speaking world, veganism is
not now and never has been a community.
It could be in the future.
It could be that right now what we're working
towards is forming some of the first vegan
communities that have ever existed in western
culture, but you're setting yourself up for
disappointment if you think of veganism as
a community that already exists.
What do I mean?
Well, you've got to take a reasonable standard
for what a community is supposed to be.
Sikhism is a minority religion in India, and
it's an even smaller minority religion within
Canada, but the Sikh community really exists.
If you go to Toronto, they have temples, they
have lawyers' offices, they have political
associations, the Sikhs are a community, even
within Toronto, and that community, although
tiny as a percentage of the population of
Canada, is still large enough that it can
be home to diverse political opinions, some
are left wing, some are right wing, some are
conservative, like any other group of human
beings, [with] all kinds of different views
on the religion itself.
Of course, they have commonalities of language,
culture and history to bind them together,
they also have common interests, including
political interests, that may deepen the sense
of community that exists, fundamentally as
something defined by their religion.
However, if you look around Canada, if you
look around the English-speaking world, you
are not going to find a community of vegans
that exists anywhere even to the standard
set by the Sikh immigrants who are now living
in Canada, and, actually, that's a pretty
low standard to choose for what a community
"is", to be considered one that exists.
If, instead of looking at a cultural or religious
community to set your standard you were to
look at a minority political party, say, the
Green Party, especially the Green Party as
it exists in Germany, well, those are substantial
political movements, even though they're very
small minorities in the different countries
they come from.
Veganism has never existed at that level,
either, neither politically nor socially,
nor as a cultural movement, not in the western
world.
I add that caveat because, if you're living
in a country like Taiwan, there there is a
religious, cultural, historical component
to vegetarianism, and that has now extended
into a vegan community.
I think you could say that a vegan community
exists in Taiwan, although even there it's
very marginal.
Okay, so that's my first point done.
Is it a negative point?
No.
I think, actually, you'll be more positively
motivated and less often disappointed and
frustrated if you accept the fact that we're
not even at the stage of having our own community
or having our own social movement yet.
Secondly, you have to recognize, that people
have gotten involved with veganism, that is,
in practice, a diet, some people get angry
when you say that, but yeah, what unifies
somebody who is a bodybuilder, an athlete
interested in veganism for health reasons,
with somebody who's an anti-vivisection activist,
maybe involved in science, concerned about
cancer research and the ethics surrounding
those issues, those two people may have nothing
in common except the practice of the vegan
diet.
And then again they may have nothing in common
with a third person who is mostly engaged
with ecological issues, with environmental
reasons to be vegan.
And they, as three individuals, may have nothing
to do with a fourth person who is a stereotypical
hippie.
Some of my best friends are stereotypical
hippies.
In that sense, looking at veganism as a kind
of political crossroads of diverse, uncommon
interests, you're at best describing something
that has the potential to form a social movement
in the same way that the anti-nuclear movement
did in the 1980s.
Back in about 1985, all over the world, there
were really strongly organized anti-nuclear-war,
anti-nuclear-weapon, sometimes anti-nuclear-power
movements, in Japan, in Germany, in Canada,
in France, around the world.
They brought together people, some of whom
were left wing, some of whom were right wing,
some of whom had mostly scientific concerns,
some environmental concerns, there are parallels.
But ultimately they only had one kind of practice
in common and that was their questioning of
or opposition to nuclear weapons.
It's very hard to form a social movement out
of a diverse group like that, let alone a
community in the meaningful sense that the
Sikh minority are a community in Toronto.
What kind of community are we talking about?
If you're just talking about a list of people
on Facebook who give each other "thumbs up",
that's not a community, that's not a political
movement, that's… that's nothing.
Given these first two clarifications I've
tried to set down, what now is the next step,
or the first step, for veganism in 2015?
To be honest with you, I think a really good
comparison is the historical transformation
we had in western culture in our attitude
toward cigarette smoking.
Stay with me for a minute, this will make
more sense as it goes along.
If you were in the western world in about
1965, cigarette smoking was everywhere, and
it was invisible to the people who engaged
in it.
This invisibility now seems hilarious: if
we watch a movie or a news report from the
1960s, we're shocked to see that there's an
ashtray in the middle of the boardroom table,
that people like lawyers, meeting with government
officials have got cigarettes out, they've
got the ashtray, there's smoke in the air,
it just seems hilarious, because to us it's
at least informal, and of course unhealthy
and raises all kinds of other issues.
But to those people engaged in that, in that
culture, at that time, this was as normal
as breathing air.
It was completely invisible, whether it was
in a restaurant, a meeting room, a university
cafeteria, a cafeteria within a hospital.
If you go to any of those cafeterias today,
they're all non-smoking, but, a few decades
ago, it would have seemed hilarious to people
to suggest that you should ban smoking or
even that you should question it.
The problem when something becomes so accepted
in the culture that it's invisible is that
you have to work hard to get the point even
to get to the point where people question
this.
Is this necessary, is this inevitable, or
is this a significant choice?
Is this a significant choice I'm making that's
going to impact my health, my children's health,
my future, my children's future?
Is there a social dimension to this?
Is there a sense of responsibility for the
public or those around me in my choosing to
be a non-smoker?
Is there even an awareness in my mind that
being a non-smoker is something that I have
a choice to be, or is cigarette smoking just
something that goes on around me all the time
and nobody really notices it.
Today, if you're vegan and you sit down in
a cafeteria, it's mildly horrifying to you
that eating meat and drinking milk is invisible
to the vast majority of people who are engaged
in it, all around you, every day.
We all deal with it.
But that's the next step, and that's the first
step for veganism, to just achieve the awareness,
this is a significant choice you're making,
this is something that has consequences for
you, for your health, for your society, for
the environment, for the future of your children,
fill in the blank.
That the difference between eating meat and
not eating meat is a meaningful choice, it
isn't just something as inevitable and invisible
as breathing the air.
Culturally, that's very hard to do, and the
type of transformation it brings about…
you can look up the statistics… people still
smoke cigarettes, and they still smoke in
large numbers, but now there's an awareness
that they're making a choice, and that awareness
itself both creates pressure for people to
quit outright, for people to become non-smokers,
but the people who choose to continue smoking,
they're under pressure all the time to smoke
as little as possible, and when they indulge
in a lot of smoking, if they try to smoke
during a business meeting, people would at
least look at them and say, "What are you
trying to do to yourself?"
And of course there's also a dimension of,
"What are you trying to do to all of us?"
I'm making this video partly in response to
a guy who just posted a set of questions (very
earnest questions) about the role of compassion
in veganism as a political movement, asking
the question, "Shouldn't vegans be people
motivated by compassion?"
"Shouldn't this be a movement defined by compassion?"
Well, the example of quitting smoking and
the cultural challenge of confronting people
with their obligation to at least be concerned
for their own health, if not other ideas,
that's useful partly because there is no role
for compassion in it.
That's a case where there are many good reasons
to quit smoking, but nobody quits smoking
for the sake of saving the life of the tobacco
plant.
So, it's kind of an instructive example to
contrast to veganism, where, of course, compassion
for the animals being killed is a major component
of what's going on and why it's going on.
Nevertheless, becoming vegan, or being motivated
by compassion, that tends to be short-term.
Even though many people have tear-jerking
stories about how they first learned about
veganism, how they first decided to become
vegan, they people who stay vegan and the
people who remain highly motivated to be activists
or to be politically engaged in vegan related
issues, that won't be motivated by short-term
compassion.
That will instead be motivated by a bunch
of virtues that went out of fashion in the
18th century, not even the 19th or 20th century,
but the 18th century.
Things like vigilance, steadfastness, self-discipline,
[having] an uncompromising attitude.
Back in the 1990s, to be called uncompromising
was always an insult.
It needn't be and it shouldn't be, but it
was, and, culturally, in the western, English-speaking
world, this is the sense in which veganism
can never be cool.
The type of people who get involved with veganism
and stick with it, those are going to be uncompromising
characters, and coolness, ever since the 1990s,
at least, had to do with not caring, a certain
kind of detached, irreverent, disregard for
the consequences of your actions.
Veganism is always asking people, "Shouldn't
you care?"
"Shouldn't you care about the consequences
of your actions?"
for air pollution, for water pollution?"
"Shouldn't you care about the consequences
for your health?"
for the world your children are going to inherit?"
Even in cases like vivisection, [there's]
a really complicated set of consequences,
where you're earnestly asking people, "Shouldn't
you care?
I care."
That engagement doesn't look like compassion,
it doesn't sound like compassion, and, as
I say, you're never going to package it as
something "cool".
In one sense it's easy to end on a positive
note because veganism is so much better today,
in 2015, than it was in 2005, and it was already
better in 2005 than it was in 1995.
So, yeah, as a kind of dietary sub-culture,
it has grown, and it's going to continue to
grow, and it's very easy to be optimistic
about that.
If you were planning, for your career, to
open a vegan bakery, it's really easy to be
confident that this is how many people are
vegan today, those numbers are only going
to rise, in almost any city in the world you
happen to be living in.
If you think that vegans exist as a community,
ask yourself, is there a vegan daycare where
you live?
If you open the phone book and look under
daycares, you're probably going to find them
for different religious groups, cultural groups,
defined in different ways.
You're probably going to find retirement homes,
also, defined in different ways.
Well, if you have kids, and you need to put
your kid in a daycare, one of your main concerns
is going to be getting vegan food for them.
If you one day want to retire and you're going
to move into a retirement home, or an old
age home, one of your main concerns is going
to be vegan food.
So, in the next 15 years, are we going to
see those types of institutions?
Are we going to see veganism really exist
as a community in bricks and mortar?
That, I'm less optimistic about.